DATE: 2022-7-6 7:32 
TITLE: Why Japanese behemoth Mitsubishi chose Maruha Nichiro for its first land-based salmon venture  
LINK: https://www.intrafish.com/aquaculture/why-japanese-behemoth-mitsubishi-chose-maruha-nichiro-for-its-first-land-based-salmon-venture/2-1-1252564 
LEAD: A Mitsubishi executive gave IntraFish the lowdown on the aquaculture joint venture planned to serve the burgeoning Japanese salmon market.
BODY: " Mitsubishi's joint venture with Maruha Nichiro to produce salmon on land in Japan  is the first domestically owned project of its kind, marking a turning point both for land-based salmon production and the Japanese market.  Mitsubishi carried out scoping for the project, which will initially see 2,500 metric tons of salmon produced in a land-based facility on Japan's west coast, in consultation with the world's second largest salmon producer and Mitsubishi subsidiary, Cermaq.   But when it came to selecting a production partner, the company chose the world's largest seafood company by revenue, Maruha Nichiro, a company spokesperson tells IntraFish  Mitsubishi is convinced is the best partner for the business.  "Maruha Nichiro... has a track record of constructing and operating numerous aquaculture farms, processing plants, distribution facilities and research facilities in Japan and overseas, and a highly specialized team with extensive knowledge in aquaculture, processing, and marketing," they said.    "We are convinced that Maruha Nichiro is the best partner for this business, where knowledge, know-how, and human resources are essential. Through our discussions to date, we have been impressed by the depth and expertise of Maruha Nichiro's human resources."  The volume of salmon set to be produced at the west coast farm is, for now, relatively small. Another Japanese land-based salmon project, owned by Norwegian company Proximar, has more ambitious targets, with plans to scale from its initial 2,500 metric tons in 2024 to 5,300 metric tons at full capacity in 2027.  But Mitsubishi is determined to take it slowly.  "While there is a possibility of expanding the scale of operations in the future, the company will first focus on achieving stable production of 2,500 metric tons per year at the facility to be constructed," they said.  And while it does not rule out further operations, for now its initial joint venture, known as Atland, will be its priority.   Should further production be planned, however, it would readily find a home in the Japanese market, where the annual demand for Atlantic salmon is around 60,000 metric tons and growing.  "Annual demand for salmon in Japan is said to far exceed the amount of salmon expected to be produced by land-based aquaculture in the coming years," they said. "It is assumed that it will be difficult to meet Japan's domestic demand for salmon solely through land-based aquaculture."  Taste and freshness rule Japanese preferences  Japanese consumers have a strong preference for freshness and an appreciation of local produce. In recent years, consumer awareness related to sustainability has also been increasing.  "Selling as 'Made in Japan' could be considered a marketing strategy," they said, adding that the key to consumer acceptance will be whether or not the taste, smell and other qualities can be produced to the same standard as those of existing salmon products.   When asked to compare its project with that of Proximar's, Umetsuji cited Mitsubishi's advantageous location in Nyuzen, Toyama Prefecture, in securing high-quality water, one of the necessary conditions for successful land-based aquaculture.  "In particular, by utilizing deep seawater, which is characterized by its cleanliness and stability at low temperatures, the facility will be operated with a minimum amount of energy," they said.  "In addition, by maintaining good breeding water quality, productivity can be increased, and the company has determined that it is possible to develop a cost-competitive business."  Success in the land-based aquaculture business also requires optimal facility design, on-site operation and production management capabilities, and profitability through cost reduction.  "We are confident that the partnership between Mitsubishi Corporation, which has experience and know-how in salmon farming, and Maruha Nichiro, which has experience in farming many species of fish, will enhance the success of the project," the spokesperson said.                                        "