DATE: 2022-7-8 4:53 
TITLE: Land-based salmon farming in Maine: From dream to disaster  
LINK: https://www.intrafish.com/opinion/land-based-salmon-farming-in-maine-from-dream-to-disaster/2-1-1254546 
LEAD: Four major projects heralded the birth of a new aquaculture frontier in the state, but these efforts have yielded no fish and plenty of disappointment.
BODY: " It seemed like a sure thing, such a good idea. Grow salmon on land in Maine and deliver it just down the road to major markets in Boston and New York City. Sure, the technology for growing salmon to market size on a commercial scale was largely unproven, but that was a hurdle most expected would be overcome.  Investors began jumping in, and the dream of a robust land-based salmon farming industry in the remote state took flight.  But the dream has turned into a disaster.  In January of 2018, Nordic Aquafarms unveiled plans to construct a 33,00-metric-ton land-based salmon farm in remote Belfast, Maine.    Now, four years later, the company has finally secured all of the necessary environmental and other permits it needs just to begin  planning the construction. No fish in the tanks, no tanks to put them in, no building to put the tanks in.  Whether it ever produces a fish in Maine remains to be seen, but the company's efforts weren't helped last week when founder and president Erik Heim and Executive Vice President Mairanne Naess quit.   While Heim provided a "mission accomplished" type of explanation for the departures, saying the project was ready for the next steps, it sounded more like a surrender to me.  Heim has been the tip of the spear for a project that began with great fanfare and high expectations, but over the four years since its launch has faced permitting challenges and stiff pushback from locals who have convinced themselves that the company and the jobs it would create are not good for Maine.   Hell, even former Maine Governor and now US Senator Angus King's reassurances didn't help.  "Nordic Aquafarm's facility will build on our state's rich fishing traditions and promote innovation and sustainability that can help Belfast and the surrounding community thrive. This is an investment in Maine people, Maine jobs, and the future of our economy," he said at the time of Nordic's launch.  Keep in mind that Atlantic Sapphire, the pioneer of large-scale land-based salmon farming in the United States, was at this time already building its Miami-based super farm -- which still hasn't quite gotten off the launching pad.   A month after Nordic's debut, Whole Oceans signed an agreement to purchase a former paper mill site in Bucksport, Maine, to house a new land-based salmon farm that would ultimately produce 20,000 metric tons of fish.   "The time for RAS has arrived, and Whole Oceans will make Bucksport a global leader in sustainable Atlantic salmon production," said Robert Piasio, CEO at that time.  Again, King tossed his support behind this new land-based player: "Aquaculture is a centerpiece of our state's ocean economy. As a result of careful planning and effort, Whole Oceans is bringing a new opportunity and economic diversification to a former industrial site, creating renewed economic vitality and jobs."  But nearly four years and three CEOs later, a shovel has yet to touch the dirt, even though the company has the approval it needs to begin construction on its proposed site.    Whole Oceans now claims it will begin construction work on the facility next year.    In June 2019, US-based salmon farmer Aquabanq accelerated its plans to build a land-based salmon production facility in Millinocket, Maine.   The company said it was building a recirculating aquaculture system (RAS) plant with the capacity to produce about 5,000 metric tons of Atlantic salmon by 2022, as well as five additional RAS facilities to double the production capacity by 2025.  In August of 2021, Aquabanq decided salmon wasn't going to work so it switched to RAS shrimp farming, and company CEO AJ Shapiro blamed the struggles of fellow land-based salmon farmer Atlantic Sapphire for his company's problems, saying Atlantic Sapphire poisoned the well for RAS salmon farming because of its missteps.   Then in October of 2020, American Aquafarms joined the party when it entered into an agreement to purchase the Maine Fair Trade Lobster facility in Gouldsboro, Maine, where it planned to develop a salmon farm with a bit of a twist.   It had plans for a closed-containment farm that would produce 30,000 metric tons of salmon by 2024, but in April the Maine Department of Marine Resources (DMR) rejected the firm's application for the project.    State officials said they would no longer process the company's lease applications for two 60-acre pen sites off Gouldsboro because the company failed to select a proper source for its fish eggs.  The company's plan to source eggs from salmon producer AquaBounty's Canada operation were flagged by the DMR last year. At the time, DMR said it told American Aquafarms officials the eggs were not on a list of qualified sources or hatcheries.  American Aquafarms had no plans to use genetically modified Atlantic salmon eggs company founder Mikael Roenes said at the time.  The company is appealing the state's decision to terminate its application and is taking the action to court.  In an appeal filed with a Maine superior court May 19, the company contends the state created an "arbitrary" deadline by giving American Aquafarms between November of last year and March of this year to address the issue of having insufficient testing for its AquaBounty egg supply.    Four land-based salmon farming projects in Maine and not a drop of fish yet. The locals have turned against the fledgling sector. The politicians, instead of heaping on the praise as they did a few years ago, have gone silent. The operators themselves seem defeated and appear to be flailing for solutions.  It may be a tad premature to write the obituary on the dream that is land-based salmon farming in Maine, but even an optimist would conclude that promise has given way to stark disappointment.  Any comments, complaints or retaliatory rants, please feel free to email me at john.fiorillo@intrafish.com .                                  "